Section A Air Force Environment
Mission.  The mission of the United States Air Force is to preserve the United States as a free nation with its fundamental institutions and values intact by preparing aerospace forces for the conduct of prompt and sustained combat operations.  If conflict occurs, the Air Force will respond with actions as directed by the National Command Authorities.  Air Force mission requires disciplined, dedicated, and educated  people who live and work by the highest personal and professional standards.
Oath
Oath of Enlistment
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitutions of the United States against all enemies, foreign or domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; and that I will obey the orders of the President of the United States and the orders of the officers appointed over me, according to the regulations and the Uniform Code of Military Justice. So help me God.  (Title 10, U.S. Code, Section 502)
Commissioning Oath
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign or domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter.  So help me God.  (Title 5, U.S. Code, Section 3331).
Upon entering the Air Force you voluntarily too an oath.  Each time you accept continued service or reenlist, you reaffirm your belief and commitment to that oath.  You promised to protect and defend your American freedoms, to obey the orders of your superiors, and agreed to live by a military set of rules and standards. 
A way of life
As a member of the Air Force, you are subject to duty 24 hours a day, including weekends and holidays.  If so directed by competent authority, you must report for duty at any hour and at any location and remain as long as necessary to get the job done, unless excused earlier by a competent authority.  The mission comes first.  Your very serious responsibilities as a member of the Air Force require the best that you can give.  Furthermore, our mission necessitates more restrictive rules and standards than normally found in civilian life.  As a consequence, individuals who cannot live up to the high standards will not be retained in the Air Force.
Customs and Courtesies
Our customs and courtesies are proven traditions.  Some written and some unwritten.  That explain what should and courtesy in dealing with other people.  They have evolved as a result of the need for order, as well as the mutual respect and sense of fraternity that exist among military personnel.
Saluting
It is a courtesy exchanged between members of the Armed Forces as both a greeting and a symbol of mutual respect.  The basic rules regarding saluting are
You salute the President of the United States, all superior commissioned officers and warrant officers of the Armed Forces, all Medal of Honor recipients, and the officers of friendly foreign nations who are superior rank.
You do not salute when indoors unless you are formally reporting to an officer senior to you.
You must always salute when outdoors and in uniform, both on and off base, unless
You are carrying articles (or a heavy object) in both hands, which cannot be transferred to the left hand, or another legitimate reason such as injury, and so forth (in this case, an oral greeting should be exchanged , such as good morning sir or maam.  If the senior arms are incapacitated, you will still salute.
You are in a designated covered or no salute area.
You are a member of a military formation or a work detail (only the senior member salutes).
You are attending a public gathering such as a sports event.
You salute officers in government cars if the car has a flag or metal standard that identifies the rank of the occupant (usually general officers and the wing or base commander).
Security police performing base entry control duties salute occupants of vehicles displaying authorized officer decals and occupants recognizable as officers in vehicles that have no decal.  Exception A salute is not required if doing so interferes with security policeman performance of duty.
Respect of the Flag
The flag of the United States represents the principles and ideals you have pledged to defend; it is treated with the same respect due to the highest public official.  It will never be treated with contempt or used as a drapery, as part of an article of clothing, or as a covering for furniture or automobiles.  No lettering of any kind should be placed on the flag nor should it be used for advertising purposes.  During parades, when in uniform you salute s the flag passes in front of you.
National Anthem.  You are required to show the proper respect to the flag and the National Anthem both indoors and outdoors, in uniform or in civilian clothes.
Indoors.  At public or military events, you are required to stand at attention during the playing of the National Anthem whether in uniform or civilian clothes, and remain silent. In uniform, you face the flag (if visible) or music but do not salute.  In civilian clothes, you place your right hand over your heart.  This does not apply when you hear the National Anthem on the radio or television.
Outdoors.  In uniform, you give the military salute and remain silent during the National Anthem.  In civilian clothes, you salute by standing at attention and place your right hand over your heart.  (Men should remove headdress with right  hand and hold it over their heart.)  When attending public events, you stand at attention and salute (when in uniform), or place your right hand over your heart (when in civilian clothes) during the playing of the National Anthem.
Retreat.  On Air Force installations the flag is lowered at the end of each day.  Usually, the bugle call Retreat is sounded and is followed by the playing of either the National Anthem or To the Colors.  If you are outside, you must stop what you are doing and face the flag.  During the sounding of Retreat you stand at Parade Rest, then come to attention and salute during the playing of the National Anthem or To the Colors.  You face in the direction of the flag (if visible) or the music.  If you are driving a vehicle, you are to stop and sit quietly until the music ends; your passengers also remain silent.
Pledge of Allegiance.  Honors to the flag during the Pledge of Allegiance are similar to those rendered during the playing of the National Anthem or To the Colors.
Military Formations or Ceremonies.  You do not recite the Pledge of Allegiance while in military formation or during military ceremonies.
Outdoors.  When in uniform, you stand at attention, face the flag, remain silent, and render the hand salute.
Indoors.  When in in uniform, stand at attention, face the flag, remain silent, but do not salute.  However, if the participants are primarily civilians or in civilian clothes, you may recite the Pledge of Allegiance if you wish.
Civilian Dress.  When in civilian clothes (indoors or outdoors), you should stand at attention, face the flag, and recite the Pledge of Allegiance while holding your right hand over your heart.  (Men should remove headdress with right hand and hold it over their heart.)
Foreign Flags.  When you are stationed in a foreign country, you must show the same respect to the host country flag and national anthem that you show to your own.  The same is true when another country national anthem is played during formal ceremonies in the United States.
Respect for Retirees.  Retirees are an integral part of the Air Force and will be treated with the same respect and courtesies as active duty members.  By public law, they have earned and are entitled to enjoy certain US government benefits, rights, and privileges.  One of these rights is that military members in a retired status are entitled to be addressed, both in written and verbal communications, by their retired rank.  Once an Air Force member always an Air Force member.
Respect for Authority.  As a general rule, senior personnel enter an aircraft or automobile last and leave first.  Junior personnel will walk to the left of seniors.  Unless otherwise authorized, subordinates will stand in the presence of senior officer personnel.  A senior may address a subordinate by his or her first name; however, it is inappropriate for a subordinate to communicate in such an informal manner.
Titles of Address.  All military personnel are addressed by their grade or title.  Military pay grade terms (for example) are not to be used to address or identify people.  Officers are addressed by the title appropriate to their grade (that is, Captain, Major, General, and so forth) or Sir or maam.  Medical and dental officers are often addressed as Doctor; chaplains are usually addressed as Chaplain.  Titles of address for enlisted personnel are 
Title Term of Address Chief Master Sergeant Chief Master Sergeant or Chief, Senior Master Sergeant Senior Master Sergeant or Sergeant, Master Sergeant Master Sergeant or Sergeant, Technical Sergeant Technical Sergeant or Sergeant, Staff Sergeant Staff Sergeant or Sergeant, Sergeant Sergeant, Title Term of Address Senior Airman Senior Airman or Airman, Airman First Class Airman First Class or Airman, Airman, Airman, Airman Basic Airman.  Note the term airman applies to both male and female enlisted personnel.
Structure.  To perform effectively in the Air Force, you must understand the structure and some of the systems that govern its operation.
Chain of Command.  The Chain of Command provides the control and communications necessary to accomplish the mission.  Each link in the chain is a level of responsibility and authority extending from the President of the United States, as Commander in Chief, through each commander, to every level, including yours.  Different levels within the chain have different responsibilities and authority; however, all levels have some things in common.  Each level in the chain is responsible for a lower level, and accountable to all higher levels.  The chain cannot work without loyalty to every level.  With loyalty up and down the chain, it is a highly efficient and effective system for getting things done.  Everyone is a part of, and subject to, the chain of command and must use it properly.  The key principle is to resolve problems and seek answers at the lowest possible level.  If it becomes necessary for you to continue up the chain, you should request assistance at each level before going to the higher level and advice that you are doing so.  (There is one qualification to this, and it is covered in e below on The Inspector General (IG).)
First Sergeant.  The first sergeant has the very important role of advising the commander and making sure the commander policies are known and understood throughout the organization.  Usually, enlisted personnel will see the first sergeant before talking to the commander.  The first sergeant is usually a good source of information and advice for all members of a unit.
Senior Enlisted Advisor.  The Senior Enlisted Advisor maintains communication liaison between the commander and the enlisted force, and with the commander; assesses morale and well-being of the enlisted force; evaluates the of noncommissioned officers leadership, management and supervisory training; monitors compliance with Air Force standards; advises councils; serves on boards; and, finally, maintains liaison with the community.  The Senior Enlisted Advisor specific duties and responsibilities and relationship to other staff agencies and subordinate activities are as specified by the commander.
Staff Agencies.  Other agencies support and strengthen the chain of command.  These include the different staff functions (the Chaplain, Staff Judge Advocate, Social Actions, Consolidated Base Personnel Office (CBPO), and so forth), the councils and the assistance groups (the Red Cross, Family Support Centers, and so forth).  These agencies are sources of professional advice or assistance in particular areas.  These agencies are not a substitute for the chain of command nor do they operate outside of it.  They support the chain and make it more efficient and effective.
The Inspector General (IG).  While the IG is not considered a structural part of the chain of command, it performs a very important role in the command function.  The IG serves as the commander advisor, investigator, and guardian of readiness.  The Inspector General responsibilities include distinct and separate systems: the Air Force Inspection System and the Air Force Complaints System.
The Air Force Inspection System.  The purpose of the Air Force Inspection System is to impartially evaluate the effectiveness and economy of Air Force policies, plans, operations, procedures, and safety programs.  It extends to all aspects of the Air Force environment, all organizations, and all levels of command.
The Air Force Complaints System.  Under the Air Force Complaints System, you have the right to present a complaint without fear of reprisals.  This right is ensured in the Air Force regulations and policy.  Complaints may be presented in person, when feasible, telephonically, or in writing to supervisors, first sergeants, commanders, members of any level of the IG system or someone higher in the chain of command.  Use of the Air Force Complaints System is encouraged, but first you should allow your immediate supervisor, first sergeant, or commander, the chance to resolve the problem.  They may be closer to the issues and thereby should be in a position to more rapidly provide a solution to the problem.  But, it is emphasized that you may enter a complaint to any level of command.  In addition to having the right to present personal complaints, you also have the responsibility to report violations of Air Force directives or the existence of an error, injustice, deficiency, fraud, waste, abuse, or a similar condition to your supervisor, first sergeant, commander, or the IG.
Military Law.  Since the military environment and duties are unique and military personnel serve throughout the world, a special system of laws and courts are required to help maintain good order and discipline.  The Uniform Code of Military Justice is the system of criminal justice that helps protect your Constitutional rights while in the Air Force.  It is a federal law enacted by Congress to carry out authority expressly granted in the US Constitution.  The Uniform Code of Military Justice contains specific articles that enforce good order and discipline in the military.  The Uniform Code of Military Justice and the rules and regulations used to administer it not only contain laws you must obey, but also provide procedures for courts martial and nonjudicial punishment.  Of course, the fact that you are required to obey military laws does not excuse you from your duty as a citizen to comply with the civil laws of the community where you live or work.
Section B Conduct
General.  The Air Force has a very important mission; and you, as a member of the Air Force, have some serious responsibilities for carrying out that mission.  You are responsible for carrying out orders, performing specific daily tasks related to your duties, and living up to the high standards of the Air Force.  If you are a supervisor, you have the responsibility to make sure your subordinates meet the same standards.  You are also held accountable for your own actions, both in the performance of duties and in your personal conduct.  If you are a supervisor, you must also hold your subordinates accountable and take appropriate corrective actions when they do not fulfill their responsibilities.  Air Force standards of conduct apply both on and off duty, in your personal behavior and in treatment of others, and in both military and civilian environments.
Public displays of affection, such as hand holding, embracing, or walking arm in arm, are inappropriate actions for members in uniform, and may be service discrediting since indiscriminate displays of affection in public detract from the professional image the Air Force intends to project.
Membership in the open mess, appropriate to your grade, is strongly encouraged.  Should you be eligible, but choose not to join, neither you nor your family members may attend that open mess as a guest.  Open mess members are permitted to use only their own club (or a like club at another base through reciprocal agreement).  If both husband and wife are not eligible for membership in the same open mess, by virtue of their grade, the noneligible member may use the mess facility of their member spouse only when accompanied by their spouse.  For such unofficial visits, the nonmember spouse will not be in uniform.  Officer and enlisted open mess members may occasionally be guests at one another open mess for officially sanctioned functions, wearing the uniform appropriate to the occasion.  As a guest, your conduct and behavior must remain above reproach.
Professional Relationships
Professional relationships are essential to the effective operation of the Air Force.  In all supervisory situations there must be a true professional relationship supportive of the mission and operational effectiveness of the Air Force.  There is a long standing and well recognized custom in the military service that officers shall not fraternize or associate with enlisted members under circumstances that prejudice the good order and discipline of the Armed Forces of the United States.
In the broader sense of superior subordinate relationships there is a balance that recognizes the appropriateness of relationships.  Social contact contributing to unit cohesiveness and effectiveness is encouraged.  However, officers and noncommissioned officers must make sure their personal relationships with members, for whom they exercise a supervisory responsibility or whose duties or assignments they are in a position of influence, do not give the appearance of favoritism, preferential treatment, or impropriety.  Excessive socialization and undue familiarity, real or perceived, degrades leadership and interferes with command authority and mission effectiveness.  It is very important that the conduct of every commander and supervisor, both on and off duty, reflects the appropriate professional relationship vital to mission accomplishment.  It is equally important for all commanders and supervisors to recognize and enforce existing regulations and standards.
Air Force members of different grades are expected to maintain a professional relationship governed by the essential elements of mutual respect, dignity, and military courtesy.  Every officer, noncommissioned officer, and airman must demonstrate the appropriate military bearing and conduct both on and off duty.  Social and personal relationships between Air Force members are normally matters of individual judgment.  They become matters of official concern when such relationships adversely affect duty performance, discipline, and morale.  For example, if an officer consistently and frequently attends other than officially sponsored enlisted parties, or if a senior Air Force member dates and shows favoritism and preferential treatment to a junior member, it may create situations that negatively affect unit cohesiveness, that is, positions of authority may be weakened, peer group relationships may become jeopardized, job performance may decrease, and loss of unit morale and spirt may occur.
Military Ethics.  As a member of the Air Force, you must practice the highest standards of behavior, obedience, and loyalty not only in your job but in your relationship with other people, and in your dealings with the civilian community.  Your code of ethics must be such that your behavior and motives do not create even the appearance of impropriety.  Your commitment to integrity will lead the way for others to follow.  Air Force Regulation, Standards of Conduct, provides guidance concerning actable conduct of Air Force members
You may not engage in any private business or professional activity or have any direct or indirect financial interest that would place you in a position where there is a conflict (or the appearance of a conflict) between your private interests and the public interest of the United States, particularly those related to your Air Force duties and responsibilities.
You may not use your Air Force position in an attempt to persuade any person or group to provide financial benefit to you or others.
As a member of a private association, you must avoid any activities on behalf of the association that are incompatible with your military position.
You and your immediate family may not solicit, and with limited exceptions may not accept gifts from anyone engaged in or endeavoring the Department of Defense.
You may not engage in any personal commercial solicitation or sale to any military personnel junior in rank or grade at any time on or off duty, in or out of uniform.  (This does not apply to the one time sale of personal property, such as home, boat, car, and so forth.  It also does not apply to off duty Department of Defense personnel employed in retail stores or other situations that do not include solicited sales.)
You may not solicit a contribution from other personnel for a gift to an official superior, make a donation or gift to an official superior, or accept a gift from subordinate Department of Defense personnel, except for voluntary gifts or contributions of nominal value on special occasions, such as marriage, illness, transfer, or retirement, provided that any gifts acquired with such contributions do not exceed a reasonable value.
You may not use government facilities or equipment for other than officially approved activities.
You may not gamble or bet while on government owned or leased property or while on duty, unless specifically authorized. engage in any conduct that is illegal, dishonest, or otherwise brings discredit on the Air Force.
Job Performance.  Job performance standards include what you do, how much you do, and how well you accomplish the duties.  Your primary responsibility is to do your part to accomplish the mission.  But accomplishing the mission requires more than just technical proficiency.  You must be a good team member.  You must be responsive and do what you are told quickly and efficiently.  You must be dependable and responsible for your actions so supervisors do not have to constantly monitor or follow up on your activities.  Quality and quantity of work are both important since they are the primary measures of your efficiency and productivity.  Your conduct and performance on the job must be guided by a sense of loyalty to both supervisors and coworkers, consistent with the safe and proper fulfillment of regulations, directives, technical orders, and other lawful orders.
Drug Abuse
Drug Abuse the illegal or improper use of drugs including marijuana is absolutely incompatible with Air Force standards of behavior, performance, and discipline necessary for accomplishing the mission and will not be tolerated.  Drug abuse can seriously damage your physical and mental health, jeopardize your safety and the safety of others.  It can also result in a less than honorable discharge from the service and punitive action under the  Uniform Code of Military Justice.
You are responsible for reporting known or suspected incidents of drug abuse by other and encouraging persons known to you to have an existing or potential drug abuse problem to seek assistance through the Air Force Drug Rehabilitation Program.  The objectives of the program are to return all identified drug abusers to full duty status or help them transition to civilian life.
Alcohol Abuse.  You have the responsibility to exercise good judgment in the use of alcohol.  Your use of alcohol must not adversely affect your duty performance or your conduct on or off duty.  Air Force policy is to prevent alcohol abuse and alcoholism among its personnel and their dependents; to assist Air Force personnel in resolving alcohol related problems; and to ensure humane management and administrative disposition of those who are unable or unwilling to be restored to full, effective functioning.  Moderation should be encouraged for those persons choosing to drink and nondrinkers are not pressured or ostracized for choosing not to drink.  Driving while intoxicated will not be tolerated; violators are subject to apprehension and punishment under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Equal Opportunity and Treatment.  Air Force standards of conduct require that you treat others with respect and dignity regardless of their race, color, religion, age, national origin, or sex.
The Air Force Equal Opportunity and Treatment Human Relations Education Program is designed to ensure that all Air Force military personnel and their dependents are allowed to live and work, on or off base, in an environment free of arbitrary discrimination according to the laws of the United States.  The Air Force does not tolerate arbitrary discrimination by act or inference.
Full time Equal Opportunity and Treatment Human Relations Education officers and noncommissioned officers are available to help you if you feel that you or your dependents have been victims of discrimination.  You are encouraged to discuss the problem with your immediate supervisor or unit commander in an attempt to resolve it at the unit level.  However, you can file a discrimination complaint with the Equal Opportunity and Treatment staff without fear of retaliation.   The staff will work with you, your supervisor, and the commander to solve the problem.
The avoidance of sexual harassment, a subcategory of sex discrimination, requires your special attention.  Professional Air Force people treat other Air Force people as professionals, regardless of sex.  Sexual harassment has no place in our Air Force.
Another key program for managers is the Affirmative Actions Plan.  Its purpose is to identify areas in which institutional discrimination may exist so appropriate corrective action can be initiated.  The Plan provides an excellent means for assessing Air Force programs and their impact on all Air Force personnel.
Financial Responsibility.  You are expected to pay your debts on time.  Failure to satisfy just financial obligations is not consistent with the standards of conduct expected of Air Force members.  Your personal checks, another important area of individual management, carry a promise that they will be paid in full when presented for payment.  Additionally, you are expected to provide regular and adequate support for your dependents, including payments required by court order.  To assist you with your financial affairs, the Air Force provides financial management information and personal counseling.
Political Activities.  Generally, you enjoy the same rights and have the same responsibilities as other citizens; however, since you are a member of the Air Force, the manner in which you exercise your rights is limited in some cases.  Under our democratic system the military, as a group, must remain politically neutral and divorced from partisan politics.  And provide guidance about participation in political activities.  There are some general rules that you should remember
You have the right and duty as an American citizen to vote and to voice your opinions concerning political matters; however, you must be very careful that your personal opinions and activities are not directly, or by implication, represented as those of the Air Force.
While you and your dependents have the right to petition the President, the Congress, or other public officials, you may not publicly solicit or collect signatures on a petition when in uniform or in a foreign country.  You may not circulate or sign a petition on an Air Force installation unless the petition has been authorized by the installation commander.
You may not distribute, on an Air Force facility, any written or printed materials that advocate the violent overthrow of the government or can be expected to incite disorder, adversely affect morale, good order, and discipline, or interfere with the accomplishment of a military mission.
You may not participate in any demonstration or other activity, within an Air Force installation, that has not been approved by the commander, could result in interference with or prevention of orderly accomplishment of a mission of the installation, or presents a clear danger to loyalty, discipline, or morale of members of the Armed Forces.
Public Statements.  When making public statements on official Air Force matters, members are governed by.  This regulation states that commanders (or authorized public affairs representatives) are the appropriate approval authority the objective is to avoid statements that do not reflect Air Force policy or that, if taken from context, could be misleading to the public.  To make sure that Air Force information is presented professionally, personnel should make certain it is accurate, prompt, and factual; is confined to their particular fields of expertise; avoids the hypothetical and speculative; reflects Air Force policy; is presented simply and honestly; and complies with the spirit and letter of the Secretary of Defense principles of public information.  For questions concerning specific responsibilities and limitations, refer to the hose base Office of Public Affairs.  The Freedom of Information Act, implemented within the Air Force by directs maximum disclosure, subject to the lawful exemptions of the act. Information provided in response to Freedom of Information Act requests is processed through the installation freedom of information office (office symbol).
Dependent Care.  The Air Force must have people in the right place at the right time, unencumbered and ready to perform the jobs for which they have been trained.  Unless specifically deferred or exempted, all members of the Air Force must be available at all times to perform a full range of military duties and assignments, including but not limited to, permanent change of station or assignment, unaccompanied tours, temporary duty including short or no notice deployment, alerts, recalls, extended hours, or shift work.
Each Air Force member must make and maintain dependent care arrangements that will allow the members to be worldwide available at all times.  Advance planning is the key to dependent care arrangements.  Every Air Force member with dependents must take the initiative to use all available military and civilian resources at his or her disposal to make sure dependents receive adequate care, support, and supervision in a manner that is compatible with the member military duties.
Dependent care plans must cover all possible situations both short and long term, and must be sufficiently detailed and systematic to provide for a smooth, rapid transfer of responsibilities to another individual during the absence of the military sponsor.
Single parents and military couples with dependents present a unique family situation; that is, a military member is the sole individual available and responsible for dependent care.  There is no civilian spouse available to fulfill dependent care responsibilities during the absence of the military sponsor.  Nevertheless, these parents and sponsors must be worldwide available.  Suitable arrangements must be made for a nonmilitary person to assume custody of dependent in the event the member is unavailable to provide necessary care due to military obligations.
Section C Appearance
Dress and Personal Appearance.  You must comply with established dress and personal appearance standards.  The standards consist of four elements neatness, cleanliness, safety, and military image.  The element requiring the most judgment is military image.  It is the most important aspect of Air Force appearance standards since other people, both military and civilian, draw certain conclusions about you and the Air Force based upon what they see.  When in uniform, you are expected to present a professional image.  This includes walking with hands out of pockets, ensuring all buttons are buttoned, and so forth.  Your appearance must instill confidence and leave no doubt that Air Force personnel respect and live a common standard and are responsive to military order and discipline.  Air Force appearance standards are designed to reflect a moderate image and to exclude the extreme, the unusual, the fad.  The standards are influenced to some degree by tradition and reflect the image the Air Force intends to project to the public.
Personal Grooming.  Although you have the right, within established limits, to express your individuality through your appearance, the Air Force has defined what is and what is not an acceptable, professional military image for Air Force members.  Except for minor variations based on sex differences, all Air Force personnel must comply with the same personal grooming standards.  Supervisors have the responsibility to determine compliance with the letter and intent of and to correct the obvious violations regardless of whether the situation identified is clearly written in the regulation.
Uniforms.  A very important part of the military image you project and the impression you create is how you wear your uniform.  As with other personal appearance standards, the Air Force emphasizes a neat, clean, professional image.  Your uniform is your personal property and it is your responsibility to keep it clean, pressed, and in good repair.  You are also responsible for knowing the authorized uniform combinations and the correct placement of ribbons, insignia, and other uniform items.  Here are some general rules you should remember
You must wear the appropriate uniform while performing your military duties unless you have been granted special authority to wear civilian clothes.  If you are authorized to wear civilian clothes on duty, you still must comply with Air Force appearance standards.
You may wear only authorized uniform combinations you may not mix uniform items or wear distinctive uniform items with civilian clothes.  Distinctive uniform items are those items that are unique to the uniform.  They include grade insignia, ribbons, cap devices, button with Air Force coat of arms, and so forth.
Out doors, you are required to wear a hat or other authorized headgear with all uniform combinations, except the mess dress (optional for men/there are no authorized mess dress hats for women).  Exception, hats are not required in designated no hat areas.  You will not wear a hat indoors.  This includes personal stops at the base exchange, commissary, dining hall, mailroom, and so forth.  Exception, individuals performing duties requiring the bearing of arms do not remove headgear.
When traveling on military aircraft or on contract flights departing from military or civilian terminals, you must wear your blue service uniform (that is, all uniform combinations except flight suits, fatigues, and job-unique utility uniforms), unless your orders specifically direct or authorize the wear of civilian clothes.  When traveling by commercial means, Air Force personnel will wear either appropriate civilian attire or service dress uniform.  When cramped conditions or extreme heat or humidity make the wear of the service dress uniform impractical, major command or installation commanders may specify exceptions to this policy in their supplements to the appropriate directive.  Personnel traveling overseas by commercial means must refer to the Foreign Clearance Guide for information about wear of uniforms in specific foreign countries.
If you wear your uniform to civilian social functions, you must wear the service dress uniform, semiformal or mess dress uniform that parallels the civilian dress for the occasion, that is coat and tie.  You may not wear fatigues or flight suites to civilian functions.
It is important that you wear your uniform properly when on base; however, your appearance in uniform off base can be even more important.  Members will not wear fatigues to off base business establishments if they intend to do extended shopping, dining, socializing, or take part in any entertainment.  To the general public you represent the Air Force and you must ensure that your appearance creates a positive, favorable impression.
Air Force members will not wear the uniform or any part of the uniform
At a meeting or demonstration by, or sponsored by, an organization, association, movement, or group that
Advocates or approves acts of force or violence to deny others their rights under the Constitution of the United States.
Seeks to change the United States government by unconstitutional means.
When participating in activities such as public speeches, interviews, picket lines, marches, or rallies; or in any public demonstration (including civil rights demonstrations) not approved by the Air Force.  Wearing the uniform may imply sanction of the cause for which the demonstration or activity is conducted.
When furthering private employment or commercial interests, if official sponsorship might be inferred.
When engaged in off duty civilian employment.
When it would discredit the Armed Forces.
At any public meeting, demonstration, march, rally, or interview if the purpose may be to advocate, express, or approve opposition to the Armed Forces of the United States.
In oversea areas, you should wear authorized uniform combinations that are parallel to the uniform combination for your host country coworkers.
Personal Appearance in Civilian Clothes.  Installation commanders may require or prohibit certain types of civilian clothes and personal grooming on an installation.  The following examples of prohibited civilian clothing and personal grooming are to be used as a guide.  They are not intended to be all inclusive.
Bare feet in commissaries, base exchanges, cafeterias, open messes, dining halls, and so forth.
Clothing with obscene, profane, or lewd words or drawings.
Clothing items showing language or symbols that further the aims of, encourage participation in, or suggest adherence to, any organization, movement, or group that unlawfully advocates or practices acts of force or violence to prevent others from exercising their rights under the laws of the United States or of any state, or that seeks to overthrow the government of the United States or its subdivisions by unlawful means.
Any unsanitary dress or grooming standards.
More guidance may be found in local directives.  It is your responsibility to know and comply with both Air Force and local directives concerning civilian dress and appearance standards.
Physical Fitness.  You are responsible for keeping yourself in good physical condition and maintaining your weight within Air Force standards.  This is important to both the Air Force and you.  Good physical condition and proper weight will help you fulfill your responsibility with vigor and alertness, and provide you the energy and capacity to respond to emergency situations and pursue leisure time activities.  By maintaining a lean and fit appearance you also project the military image expected of all Air Force personnel.  Command and supervisory involvement are integral parts of ensuring compliance with the fitness and weight programs.
Government Quarters.  If you live in base quarters, you must make sure they are clean, orderly, and I n safe condition.  You are responsible for taking care of any furniture and appliances provided as well as the walls, floors, and fixtures.  While fair wear and tear is expected, destruction of government property will result in a charge for repair and replacement.  You may, within some limits, decorate your quarters to suit your tastes.  You may not, however, openly display materials that are obscene, racist, sexist, pornographic, or likely to incite violence or disorder because such materials detract from the good order, morale, and discipline of the Air Force.  Your commander has the authority to determine what can and cannot be displayed.  Since your quarts are government property, they are subject to periodic inspection.  The purpose of the inspection is to ensure that Air Force standards of cleanliness, order, decor, and safety are maintained.




     

    
